---
title: "The Ghost of BBS Past: A Cautionary Tale"
date: 2018-11-27T03:43:17Z
---

Note: if you come to this article from the BBS community, please
read it with an open mind.  It is not exactly complimentary, but it
is not intended as a slight.

About twelve years ago, I read the
"[Voices in My Head](http://textfiles.com/bbs/MINDVOX/voices.txt)"
eassay about the birth of MindVox by
[Patrick "Lord Digital" Kroupa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_K._Kroupa).
I revisited it recently and, as before, found it interesting in
giving some insight into life on the "digital frontier" of the early
BBS community.  Kroupa laments the homogenization that came with the
settlement of that frontier and his essay explains the motivation
for a rebirth of a kind with the creation of MindVox.  He writes
well and draws the reader in, but he only gives a glimpse of a world
one is difficult to imagine if you weren't there and then, like a
magician, pulls his cloak tight and hides it from sight, as if to
say, "no; you're not one of the chosen few.  You aren't ready yet."
This had to be deliberate; a way of generating that most powerful of
marketing drugs: hype.

I'll give him props for showmanship.

But while Kroupa claims that he and the early "pioneers" were on the
forefront of the technology wave, one can make an argument that they
were actually behind: in particular, his essay does not mention, and
therefore discounts, the existence of other systems and the work
being done in the research community at the time the BBS community
was forming.

Reading between the lines, and having seen something of the desert
he describes of cookie-cutter track homes that replaced the frontier
settlements, something else grabs my attention: he's right.

But before I get to that, let me mention an annoyance: a thing I
have noticed is that the enduring writing from that place and time
are all voiced with this pseudo-formal register that I found
captivating at the time, but in retrospect I find pretentious and
frankly irritating.  The ridiculous "handles", the uniformly
grandiose writing styles; all of it comes across as sophomoric.
Hell, the mere fact that Kroupa's document is subtitled, "The
Overture."  What nonsense.

Further, the descriptions are stale and come off as the analysis of
a group of posturing amateurs who managed to gain facility with the
facade of a technology few had been exposed to but that they didn't
really understand, and who similarly adopted the facade of the
pseudo-academic techniques used to present and justify the resulting
tale.  Unfortunately, this is just auto-hageography; bad academics.

And yet, I find myself longing for that distant past.  Why?  One
word:

## Nostalgia.

Nostalgia is a dangerous thing, because it is almost always
disappointing.  If one succumbs to its siren song often enough, one
eventually realizes that nostalgia is a desire to reconnect with a
time and a place and people that no longer exist: the time has
passed, and the place has moved on as a result.  The people you
remember are usually no longer there, and if they are, well, you
usually find out that you've changed and they haven't (or vice
versa) and if they haven't, then there's a reason you stopped
hanging around with them in the first place.  In any event the thing
you were nostalgic for is just no longer what you rosily remember.
The events have faded in your mind, the jagged edges of the
irritating or just plain bad being slowly dulled by the shifting
sands of time until what is left is a shell of the actual reality
you experienced: a pleasant memory of the good parts.  But trying to
recreate what you faultily remember inevitably dredges up the bad
and the whole experience becomes a frustrating let-down.

And yet, we do it anyway.

So let's try and head the disappointment off now, shall we?  What
were the _bad_ parts of the BBS experience?

## In the Trailing Wake of the Technology Wave

First, the hardware and software.  These were anemic at best;
under-powered microcomputers and single-user, single-tasking program
loaders in lieu of real operating systems.  The programs were buggy
and crashed often, occasionally corrupting the files they depended
on for proper operation, if not the underlying filesystems.  Running
a BBS meant dedicating a computer to it, which meant it couldn't
otherwise be employed for useful work, despite being idle waiting
for callers most of the time (or waiting for the transmission of a
byte representing a keystroke modulated over an analog telephone
line).

The real excitement and adventure in computing and communications
was happening in industrial, government and academic research labs
connected by networks far more capable and interesting than anything
that the BBS community could have dreamt of.  The level of work was
infinitely more sophisticated at these research centers than at the
local 2600 meeting or on a DOS-based BBS.  To the extent that these
innovations were considered at all in the BBS community, it was as a
group of outsiders looking in, not the pioneers and innovators.  To
be perfectly honest, most BBSes were a hobbyist concern and not
exactly innovative or important systems.

But in the minds of the participants it _was_ important.  In the
collective BBS imagination, wars were waged, dragons slain, and
everyday Joe-Schmoe hobbyists fancied themselves a new breed of
sheriff on an electronic neuvo-Wild West frontier.  In actuality,
this was more like a sound-stage and the sheriff's, knights and
pirates more like actors than the real thing: more LARPers than
_Lord of the Rings_.

That's not to say that the BBS community didn't have an impact: it
surely did.  And while demonstrably valuable, shortly after
Christensen and Suess it became derivative of and applied _onto_
pre-existing creations rather than truly innovative or original
work.

But, they _had_ a community and a culture and it was _fun_ for them,
and isn't that what really counts?  The high-schoolers didn't take
down the system, and the earnest but dim Radio Shack employee didn't
thwart IT crime by setting up a BBS on his home computer and
plugging it into a modem in his spare room.  And figuring out how to
install a UART driver and produce a set of "AT" commands didn't make
the sysop a computer expert.  But in this fantasy world, none of
that mattered: one could plug in and escape and be someone else for
a few hours.

The kids distributing poorly written text files with "instructions"
for breaking into telephone switches or minicomputers were merely
exploiting shortcuts that engineers and technicians had put into
those systems for their own convenience; they were rarely
discovering anything particularly new or novel.  The persistent myth
of the "uberhacker" who could hack into _any_ system, leaving no
trace, was about as realistic as the idea that a regular joe setting
up a BBS to "combat computer piracy" in his local calling area was
going to stop kids from trading stacks of floppy disks in the junior
high school cafeteria.  In reality, the "k-rad" callers of the local
"'leet boards" were simply not master hackers teetering on the edge
of obtaining nuclear launch codes, despite all the hype to the
contrary.

So is it wrong to mourn the death of the BBS community and
subculture?  Not really; they had fun.  But it is important to
contextualize the Fat Dragon by understanding that the death of that
community and subculture was inevitable: they weren't the pioneers
and experts, so couldn't ride the wave when the technology changed
and their wave crashed over them.

In short: they weren't equipped to deal with the changes they found
themselves caught up in.  So they stagnated and died.

## The Last Piece of the Historical Puzzle: Public Access Unix Systems

But there is something that persisted: public access Unix.

This is basically what the name implies: Unix systems that were (or
are!) publicly accessible.

Recall that in the previous post on history and motivation, we
quoted Dennis Ritchie saying the following:

>What we wanted to preserve was not just a good
>environment in which to do programming, but a system
>around which a fellowship could form.  We knew from
>experience that the essence of communal computing, as
>supplied by remote-access, time-shared machines, is
>not just to type programs into a terminal instead of
>a keypunch, but to encourage close communication."

(From http://cm.bell-labs.co/who/dmr/hist.html)

The researchers at Bell Labs, coming off of the Multics project,
strove to create an environment that encouraged communication and
collaboration, not just typing in programs.

I think that the earliest BBS experiments were exactly that:
Christensen and Suess's November 1978 article in BYTE magazine is
all about this neat hack that they came up with to foster
communication in their local computer club; they were engineers
interested in building a social community around technology.  On the
primitive microcomputers of the day this was accomplished through
simple, menu-driven captive interfaces because those machines
weren't packing the horses for much else.  Certainly, they weren't
powerful enough to support running a multiuser, multiprocessing
operating system like Unix (this is somewhat debatable actually, but
true to a first-order approximation: Ken Thompson got a PDP-7 to do
some amazing things, but he's a virtuoso).

But BBSes quickly became a hobbyist hotspot, and those hobbyists
determined what the systems did and why.  As it turns out, I think
the more technically inclined quickly moved on from CP/M and DOS and
the limitations of single-tasking, single-user program loaders like
them to what they probably wanted all along, which were multi-user
timesharing systems.  Perhaps Unix specifically wasn't a
requirement: I'm sure some would have loved to have a PDP-11 running
RSTS/E or a VAX running VMS, but recall that those cost real money
at the time.  But by the late 1980s, Unix was expensive compared to
DOS but not out of the price range for a well-employed engineer,
scientist or programmer.  One could get a reasonable version of
System V that would run on a beefy but not inordinately expensive PC
of the era, whereas a VAX would have cost like USD 30k in 1988
dollars.  So the pure hobbyist types stayed with the captive
menu-driven user interfaces on PCs running DOS and similar systems,
but the tinkerers and experimental types moved on.

To the extent that the latter folks wanted to cast the net for a
wider audience, you had things like public-access Unix systems
because, frankly, you could do so much more with them.  They were
less widespread because they were more expensive and required more
expertise to run than the simpler BBS programs, which often wrapped
all of the administrative functionality up into a pseudo-graphical,
menu-driven interface geared toward the more novice "sysop" types.

## Looking Forward

All of this is hindsight, but will inform us as we look forward.

It's interesting that at the time of Kroupa's writing (1992) there
was already a sense that the BBS community had stagnated and was in
need of a reset.  So supposing we were to analyze the architecture
of the average BBS; what's really worth preserving?

Thinking about these things is what informs us going forward.  We'll
start from the basis of a public access Unix system in the next
post.
