---
title: "Motivation and History"
date: 2018-11-27T03:23:15Z
---

One day when I was in the ninth grade, I was in my high school's
library and a ran across a Dungeons and Dragons acquaintance perched
in front of an old Apple ][ computer.  As I went to say hello, what
was on his screen grabbed my attention: it was a "splash" graphic
from Tradewars 2002; the one of the space station orbiting a planet,
drawing line by line at 1200 BAUD on the raster display of the Apple
//e in all its amber monochrome glory.

"What's that?" I asked.  "A game," he replied.  "But there are no
games on that computer...."

Which was true.

But our town was host to a major research university just down the
road.  To "enrich" the experience of its students, the school had
connected this small computer with a modem in an out-of-the-way
corner of the library to a little-used analog telephone line and
allocated it for calling into the catalog system at the university's
main library.  Ostensibly to assist students with (high school
level) research, a laminated sheet with printed instructions for
dialing the modem into the university's terminal server and
connecting to the card catalog system was taped to the wall next to
the aging machine.

With only its dual 5.25" floppy drives, 6502 processor, mere
kilobytes of RAM and builtin keyboard bearing mute witness to the
proper use of this resource, nothing prevented the enterprising
student from dialing a _different_ telephone number and directing
the high school machine to connect to a _different_ computer.

Of course all of this was unknown to me.  It was 1991 and I was far
more into punk rock and skateboarding than computer games.  My aging
NES, dutifully purchased during the 1986 rush, had lain unused in
our basement for the better part of 4 years.  While I had some vague
idea that computers could communicate with one another (I _had_ seen
the movie "War Games" after all), that they could do so in anything
other than an utterly static, proscribed way was a concept I had
never really bothered to ponder; Matthew Broderick very nearly
starting World War III between sips of Tab was merely Hollywood
embellishment, just like Joshua's computerized voice.  And besides,
who cared?

But here was my friend in the high school library, explaining to me
that he was dialing into a BBS run by another classmate, and that
using the antiquated Apple //e, one could, in principle, call any
other computer that was connected to a modem.  Again, on some plane
I already _knew_ this; but there's a difference between knowing and
experiencing.

He walked me through creating an account on this BBS and setting up
to play Tradewars myself.  Here was something new and exciting, but
beyond just playing games, there was the possibility of sending and
receiving messages.

Of course there _were_ no games on the anemic Apple //e in the high
school.  After all, it really was strictly for calling the
University's library; the breakthrough was in realizing that it
could be repurposed to call _another_, different computer and play
games on _that_ machine.  In a literal sense it was merely the
conduit, but in some other sense it meant that games were
_accessible_ on, or more precisely from, that machine.  Along with
an entirely new world.

## Spaces within spaces

Stumbling onto a BBS for the first time might be where I first
realized that multiple realities coexisted with and overlapped the
real, physical world.  I don't mean realities in a metaphysical
sense, or in the sense of parallel dimensions or universes, but
rather in the sense of the lived experiences of different people.

Years later I was walking down Wall Street in New York City and
crossed an intersection where a homeless man was begging while a
wealthy stock broker passed by from one direction and myself from
another.  For a brief moment all three of our lives intersected in
that shared physical space as we walked past one another, but we
each inhabited very different worlds: my world was not the opulent
wealth of the stock broker and similarly my world was not the
homeless man's austere existence.  The idea that those worlds were
multiplexed onto the same _physical_ space but that our lived
realities were so vastly different from one another was intriguing.

Discovering the local BBSes was a much earlier variation on this
theme, though at the time I couldn't articulate it as such.  But in
retrospect, finding those message bases was like tripping through
the rabbit hole and finding a fully formed virtual world on the
other side; a world that I didn't know existed, but was alive in the
same physical spaces I'd inhabited my entire life and that had as
major players many of the kids I'd passed by in the hallways for
years.  The kids in the know at school had a place where they spent
time creating a communications network that existed right under the
noses of the arrogant jocks and "popular" kids who picked on them at
recess and then tripped them in the halls, or the "adults" who were
too distracted to notice.

These kids had a sophisticated means of conversing among themselves
in a social space that was totally outside of my previous experience
in every way.  While I had been noisily rolling down the street,
they had been busy indoors harnessing technology to completely
sidestep the physical world, creating their own reality instead.  I
had never stopped to consider what these people did when they got
home in the afternoons, but they had forged their own reality.
Discovering this was a revelatory experience and I became interested
in exploring these mysterious digital caverns.

And of course that world does have a physical component.  But it is
a component of modulated signals, of magnetic fields and electrical
pulses in a semiconductor wafer.  While real in a physical sense, it
is still different than a face-to-face conversation because it's
mediated by a machine.  While the same might be true of the
telephone, it too is different because of, in some sense, the
extremity of the medium: the interposition of a digital layer and
all that entails is different than the analog reproduction of sound,
or even digitization of analyzed sound, which at least attempts to
faithfully reproduce the original input.  But this world was text on
a screen; a pure abstraction.  In the same way that a novel is a
physical object but contains a fictional world that is _not_ the
book, so these text-based systems contained real worlds but that
were not themselves the computers, modems, phone lines, floppy and
and hard disks, and masses of telecommunications infrastructure that
made them up.

## BBS History, an Interlude

The BBS did not come first.

By that I mean that the BBS was not the first computerized social
system.  I've written about this on my
[personal blog](http://pub.gajendra.net/2012/09/on_social), but
briefly research into socialization via computer, as exemplified by
timesharing systems of the era, had been ongoing since the 1960s, a
subject we will return to later.  And experiments like Community
Memory, hosted on a mainframe system, started exploring the idea in
the early 1970s.

But the BBS, coinciding with a microcomputer explosion that was
itself catalyzed by a dramatic drop in the price of consumer
electronics, popularized digitally mediated social interaction and
moved it out of the lab and into the hands of the hobbyist.  Perhaps
for the first time, mere mortals could set up the infrastructure for
computerized communication.

The origin of the BBS, as it was understood by the time I saw one in
the early 1990s, is commonly taken to be the creation of the CBBS
("Computerized Bulletin Board System") by Randy Suess and Ward
Christensen in the late 1970s. Christensen and Suess were both were
members of CACHE, a Chicago-area computer club.  A blizzard in early
1978 left Christensen snowed in at home, so he called Suess and the
two talked about building a microcomputer-based system for
electronically disseminating information for their computer club.
Christensen had previously written a program for transferring files
via modem between CP/M systems that he called "MODEM" (but that was
quickly renamed "XMODEM") and Suess reportedly said, "you do the
software, I'll do the hardware" and the result was CBBS, which
allowed users with a modem to dial a phone number (in Suess's home;
Christensen lived in the suburbs outside of Chicago's city calling
area, but Suess lived in Chicago proper, so they located the system
at Suess's in order to avoid long distance changes for the majority
of callers).

The CBBS system was described in an article in the November, 1978
issue of _BYTE_ magazine
["Hobbyist Computerized Bulletin Board"](http://vintagecomputer.net/cisc367/byte%20nov%201978%20computerized%20BBS%20-%20ward%20christensen.pdf).
The system it ran on was minimal: an Intel 8080 processor, several
kilobytes of RAM, a floppy drive, a hobbyist 300 BAUD Hayes modem
and miscellaneous peripherals, all tied together using CP/M.  The
BBS software itself was written in assembler, based on a mock-up
written in BASIC.  The _BYTE_ article goes into detail on both the
hardware and software configuration.

The user interface was captive and mostly menu-driven, reminiscent
of commercial data processing applications of the time.  This makes
sense in that the article alludes to a desire to keep users from
accessing CP/M directly, but the application was probably also
pushing the limits of the underlying microcomputer.  Almost by
necessity, the BBS software was simultaneously simple and entirely
self-contained: it was user interface, user management, messaging,
file organization and transfer, etc, all in one package.  But
importantly the machine it ran on just wasn't capable of being used
as a multitasking, multiuser timesharing system: hardware resources
were simply too constrained.

Fast-forward five or so years and a suitably powerful IBM PC capable
of running Unix would be on the market, but by then the die had been
cast.  For better or for worse, Christensen and Suess did not just
build the _first_ recognizable BBS, they also created the archetype
for all BBSes to follow.  Thus, the initial years were marked by
similarly primitive systems, which carried forward the same basic
structure even as the underlying computers became capable of much
more.

The next nearly 20 years find BBSes enjoying almost exponential
growth.  By the heyday of 1996, nearly 150,000 BBSes are in
operation in the United States alone.

By this time, BBS software packages are often commercially supported
operations and turnkey applications, including relatively
sophisticated menu-driven configuration and management tools,
editors, etc.

## Concurrent Developments

Of course, things were happening in the industry outside of the
hobbyist domain while all of this was going on.  The Multics project
had started as a joint effort between the Masschusetts Institute of
Technology, Bell Laboratories, and then-computer manufacturer
General Electric to build a "computing service": the vision was of a
"computer utility" analogous to the familiar telephone or electrical
utilities.  One would simply plug a terminal into a machine and
access a timesharing system running on a powerful computer that
could provide for the computational needs of the entire city of
Boston.  Multics was wildly ambitious but it was proved much harder
to deliver on its many promises in a timely and cost-effective
manner than originally anticipated, and Bell Labs had pulled out of
the project in 1968.

Beginning in 1969, two veterans of the Multics project at Bell Labs,
Ken Thompson, and Dennis Ritchie began implementing a simple
timesharing operating system on a little used PDP-7 minicomputer at
the Bell Labs site in Murray Hill, New Jersey.  The result was
jokingly called "Unics", a pun on the name "Multics" (which stood
for Multiplexed Information and Computing service; "Unics" jokingly
was a portmanteau for "Uniplexed Information and Computing
Service").  Initially implemented by Ken Thompson based on a
hypothetical design by Thompson, Ritchie and Rudd Canaday from the
year prior, Thompson's skunkworks activity caught Ritche's
attention, who quickly joined the effort.  Between the two of them,
they were able to produce something interesting enough that they
convinced their management to fund the installation of a PDP-11
minicomputer; Bell Labs changed the name to "Unix" and the new
system proved to be a pleasant programming environment that rapidly
became the focus of the computing sciences research group at the
labs.

But the system wasn't just for programming; from the start it was
also a communications medium.  As Ritchie put it in a paper titled,
_The Evolution of the Unix Time-sharing System_ given at the
Language Design and Programming Methodology conference in Sydney,
Australia in 1979:

> What we wanted to preserve was not just a good environment in
> which to do programming, but a system around which a fellowship
> could form. We knew from experience that the essence of communal
> computing, as supplied by remote-access, time-shared machines, is
> not just to type programs into a terminal instead of a keypunch,
> but to encourage close communication.

Unix was an incredibly important system throughout the 1970s, and
became the system of choice for University computer science
departments, being the example used to train a generation of
computer scientists and software engineers.

In 1978, the same year as Christensen and Suess's _BYTE_ article,
Digital Equipment Corporation released the VAX minicomputer; a
"super-mini" machine with a 32-bit address space.  The machine would
go on to achieve enormous popularity running it's native VMS
operating system, as well as Unix, which was ported to the VAX in
short order.

As the VAX went on to become the system of choice in universities
and other research organizations, students at the University of
California, Berkeley, added demand paging to Unix to support Lisp
environments and large relational database systems. This work formed
the basis of the "Berkeley Standard Distribution" of Unix, or BSD.
BSD on the VAX would be selected by ARPA, now called DARPA (the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) as the standard for
defense contractors in the 1980s, leading to an explosion in the
growth and popularity of both Unix and the VAX.  Timesharing would
grow in popularity throughout the 1970s until the introduction of
graphical workstations in the early 1980s.  Designed as powerful
systems for scientists and engineers, workstation vendors gravitated
towards Unix as the base operating system for their offerings.
While "personal computer" offerings continued to offer simple,
single-task, single-user program loaders as operating systems,
professional users came to expect Unix.

## Decline

Unbeknownst to most hobbyists, in 1969 an obscure research project
was funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the US
government to develop a packet switched network interconnecting
government-sponsored computer centers at universities and other
institutions.  The resulting ARPAnet showed great promise and grew
rapidly through the 1970s, though the initial 8-bit addresses used
by the ARPAnet Network Control Protocol (NCP) was found inadequate
for continued expansion, and in the mid- to late- 70s, attention
turned towards designing and implementing an expanded Internet
Protocol with 32-bit addresses divided into host and network
components.  Additional packet-oriented User Datagram Protocols
(UDP) and stream-oriented Tranmission Control Protocols (TCP)
layered on top of this IP protocol; the suite is known as "TCP/IP".
On January 1, 1983, flag day is declared and the newly emergent but
otherwise unknown Internet officially switches from NCP to TCP/IP.
Within a decade, there are well over a million systems connected to
the Internet; an order of magnitude more than the total number of
BBSes.

The Internet remained a research project until the early 1990s, when
the Clinton administration opened it up for commercialization, and
by 1995, commercial Internet Service Providers were offering dialup
access to the Internet with broadband access following shortly
thereafter.  Combined with the emergence of the World Wide Web,
uptake was explosive.

The effect on the BBS market was immediate and devastating.  Almost
overnight, users dumped dialup BBS systems in favor of the far
richer content of the Internet.

To understand this, one must see that using a BBS was sort of like
visiting someone in their home.  That person graciously invested in
the infrastructure for you to visit: s/he provided a computer
running the BBS software, customized the content on that system,
paid for a telephone line and modem for you to dial into and connect
through.  And while many systems asked for a nominal financial
contribution to help defray costs, the expectation was very much
that one conduct oneself as if one were a guest in another's home.
Indeed, BBSes were often "themed" to the tastes of the system
operator, so dialing in would give you a taste of what that person
found interesting or exciting, giving a glimpse into the host's
personality.  One did well to honor the implicit social contract by
being polite.

But this could also be stifling.  Arguments might flair up, only to
be unceremoniously tamped down by the will of the system operator,
or "sysop."  The effect was along the lines of, "you may come into
my house, by don't track mud on the carpet."

The Internet, in contrast, was a green field of openness.  And where
BBSes were focused on a particular geographical location, the
Internet was truly global.  One could connect to a computer a
continent away in more or less the same manner one connected to a
machine in the next room.  There were no international or long
distance telephone charges involved.  One could literally
criss-cross the globe for the cost of a local phone call, sampling
whatever content struck one's fancy.  Instead of downloading from
the meager supply of "files" local to each BBS, one could peruse
entire catalogs of useful software, most of which was free for the
taking.  Instead of exchanging messages with a handful of local
users, one could avail oneself of high quality, global conversations
on USENET.  Instead of chatting with the handful of users -- again,
all local -- who could dial into a multi-line BBS system, one could
experience globally distributed real-time communications with
thousands of other people on IRC.  You weren't limited to some small
number of minutes connected to a BBS, but rather could languish
online for hours.  And instead of the stifling figure of a sysop
standing over one's shoulder, there was an ethos of freedom of
information exchange that was unsupervised and unfettered.

Was it any wonder the users left?

## Alternative histories...?

But here we have to take a step back and ask ourselves, what did
these early BBS pioneers _really_ want?  Suppose they had had access
to a minicomputer running a timesharing operating system such a
PDP-11 running RSTS/E, RSX-11m, or even Unix.  Would they have
pressed that into service over their homebrew microcomputer system,
even modulo the differences in power consumption, space and heat
dissipation? Randy Suess went on to run the Chinet public-access
Unix system, which would tend to indicate that yes, they probably
would have.

Consider that many custom functions of the CBBS software would just
have been built-in features of a timesharing operating system for a
minicomputer: user management, for example, was a function of the
operating system, not something one should have to write oneself. In
addition, more advanced systems had a process model, editors,
development tools including user interface toolkits, a security and
permissions system, and a suite of associated software: mail
systems, pagers, chat programs, etc.

But a PDP-11 or a Pr1me or similar machine (let alone the recently
announced VAX) cost real money in 1978, whereas a microcomputer was
newly accessible at reasonable cost for motivated individuals like
Suess and Christensen.  The choice was pragmatic.

But what if they _could_ have done it differently?  Thinking about
this is our motivation: what would it be like if we engineered a BBS
from the ground up on a more sophisticated platform?  The result of
this experiment is the _Fat Dragon_.
